we just spent three days tuning some of
the best memory we've ever worked with
on the Intel i5 10400 the AMD r5 3600
the a and the r3 3300 ex and a couple of
others and the point of all of this was
to create a chart that was completely
filled from top to bottom with memory
timings and frequencies as tested
particularly on the i-5 10 400 that's
because in our 10 400 review we showed
that you really shouldn't buy the CPU
there is an argument to be made for OAM
systems and there's an argument to be
made for developers or someone who wants
an IGP doesn't overclock what ever more
basic tasks but for our core audience
don't buy it that's what we said in the
review and that conclusion was read
specifically because you end up losing
most of the features that a z4 90 board
has to offer if you buy it with a z4 90
board but a you buy it because locks
doesn't have a K at the end of it but if
you buy it with a more appropriate B or
H board you lose the memory speed
options at least past a certain
frequency and that ends up killing
performance but the arguments that we
received from other people online we'll
leave it there I guess was that why
didn't you just tune the timings you can
just tune the timings of 2666 or 29:33
to be tighter so we did that got them
down to C L 10 420 666 but we also
invested equal effort in the competing
parts because that's fair before that
this video is brought to you by the be
quiet pure bass 500 DX the pure bass 500
DX is a new push from be quiet and to
mesh fronted cases that are more
thermally focused the 500 DX maintains
high build quality and attention to
detail for its dust filters front panel
installation and fan placement and still
has additional focus on noise control
the case comes with three 140 ml pure
wins two fans stock and has RGB LEDs but
with a physical Hardware switch for easy
control learn more about the be quiet
pure bass 500 DX at the link in the
description below
alright so quick back story then again
the non Z motherboards historically have
been limited to whatever the support
frequency is for the processor
technically not of Intel's processors
that we've reviewed lately even support
3200 out of the box that's not like
there
baseline speck just like a Andes
baseline in the past wasn't 3200 things
have changed but obviously XMP changes
that differences that Intel with XMP on
B and H motherboards you get the timings
you don't get the frequency at least if
it's above whatever the limit is that's
gonna be 20 666 or 29 33 and the board
and the CPU both play a role and which
of those two numbers that'll be both
obviously are lower than what you would
get on a z series board but you should
only really by a Z series board if
you're buying a ksq CPU especially this
generation because intel has invested so
much into the overclocking support and
the motherboard manufacturers have to
and you lose all of that with a non K
CPU so we're gonna be revisiting this we
had a couple questions asking well what
if you tune to the 10 400 would it then
become comparable to a 3600 3300 X
whatever it may be and the answer is
well I mean yeah but you got a tune the
other 1/2 because that's fair so we set
a one-day time limit for all these parts
10600 k we had already done the 3600 we
needed to do the 3300 x we had already
invested about half a day into
previously that 10 400 we needed to do
so we had a time limit on each of these
in a given amount of time and under a
workday how far could you get the CPU
reasonably with its memory so for case
Q's and for an these parts that means
overclocking everything for the 10 400
that means only overclocking or tuning
the memory to the capacity that would be
supported by our theoretical HIV
motherboard in our efforts then to get
the 10 400 to clawback its performance
lost from our baseline 3214 1414
benchmarks that we do for all of our CP
is standardized reviews memory to get it
back to that level from 2666 we dropped
in a kit of $300 memory this is
genuinely the most insane memory of ever
worked with actually so this is the if
you want an F for 4000 C 15 D 16 GTRs
it's to 6 of 8 we drop that in there 300
a ram we had to ask g scale for it
obviously and worked with it for a while
and $300 Ram $180 CPU and then a Maximus
12 extreme motherboard with our AI 510
409 K part we we
tuned all of it and the results are
interesting because even then it's kind
of rough for the 10400 but the biggest
part is doing equal tuning for
everything that's being tested against
each other
quick important note - we worked with
basically all of the secondary timings
works with all the primary timings
tertiary we left about half of them
alone and played around with the rest so
this it's not just primary timings here
the lower-level timings have a massive
impact on performance especially things
like RF C and T fought so those are
modified too but we only have so much
room in a chart and well if we get an
article up with this we'll try to list
some more detail for each one let's get
into the numbers we'll start with hitman
2 since it shows good scaling the 10400
original review numbers had it at 121
FPS average for the 32 hundred megahertz
test which assumes by the way a Z 490
motherboard paired with your $180 locked
non K CPU and it followed with an
average of 102 fps for the 2666 more
reasonable results as suited for the bnh
motherboards the most ridiculous tune we
did was 2666 at CL 10 marked as a which
took us about half a day or so of worked
dial in approaching a day on $300 memory
including tuning for half of the lower
down timings so that be things like Tifa
t RF c t-- c WL c ke pulse width and all
the other stuff alongside those the
result was about 117 FPS average for all
of that work so that's a $300 kit of
memory for your $180 CPU i'm presumably
a $100 bah motherboard otherwise you'd
be running a higher frequency so you can
have for all of that performance that
outperforms a $120 3300 ex stock CPU
with our standard kit of review memory
and it outperforms it by 2.6 percent
versus the 3200 CL 14 test that we did
for the 3300 X the original 3200 CL 1410
400 results still leads this result by
the way by 3.7 percent
so for anyone complaining why we didn't
waste literally days manually tuning the
timings on CPUs especially one that no
one should buy like the 10 400 this is
your answer like we said before it's an
arms race you can do this for every CPU
that we test we spent another day too
the ten 600k to keep it fair and ended
up at 147 FPS average the 10400 isn't
even close we spent a day tuning the
3600 as well and we got the memory up to
38 66 15 15 15 34 and 1 2 1 2 1 m clock
you clock and f clock that place that
128 FPS average tying a stock 10 600 k
cpu at 3,200 CL 14 and outperforming the
10 400 super tuned CL 10 a listing by 9%
we spent equal time on both of these
CPUs adding a maximum cash ratio to 43
acts on the 10 400 got us a little bit
further gets you to 117 FPS average with
the settings on the chart so it still
loses by a rough mile assuming 29 33 is
supported on B and H boards 410 400
which isn't confirmed we maxed that out
at about 119 FPS average with our D
listing at twelve twelve twelve twenty
eight so the 3600 still wins here
because it's simply open for tuning and
overclocking as is the ten 600k if you
shoved $300 of ram into the sockets of a
$200 e 490 motherboard for your locked
$180 10 400 you can benefit from a 129
FPS average in this bench or you could
just buy something that actually makes
sense instead like a 10 600 K ram that
costs a third of the price and still
manages 7% more performance at 138 FPS
average but to each their own it cost
the same for both of those two example
configurations f1 is up next another
highly scalable title in this one the
original review 3200 number landed at
247 FPS average which looks pretty
competitive against the stock 3600 226
FPS average until we remember that you
can't really OC the RAM on B&H boards
historically and at the same time that
3600 is fully unlocked on its platform
the 216 FPS average number is our
baseline instead for this with the $300
Trident z kit and our day of investment
item a ends up at 242 FPS average it has
successfully managed to basically equate
our original 3200 CL 14 result and all
it took was just turning TC wlt cket
faulty RFC TC ltr' CDT Rast er
Str DLT RTP TR e fi t WT RL t WT RS t rd
r TS t WR WR and a couple of others that
are also a mouthful so we assume that
when people asked why we didn't just
tune the timings this is probably what
they had in mind that seems like what
they would have thought of
so all that done the performance isn't
really that exciting at the LOX 2666
megahertz it's clear that frequency
matters the 3600 with a 40 350 megahertz
tune and stuff about equal to the 30 200
megahertz numbers or the heavily tuned
10400 numbers at around 244 FPS average
for the 36 at 42 50 for the 36 at 4,400
megahertz that puts us at 247 FPS
average the 10 600 k meanwhile still
roughly outperforms all this stock it's
beaten by the C entry though of the 10
400 with 4000 megahertz Ram on Z 490
going against what anyone would actually
use of course the 10 600 K with its own
armaments hits 285 FPS average managing
to lead once again the 3300 ex meanwhile
has its own tune running at 242 FPS
average with cheaper memory less time
committed and $120 CPU that's the team
that Patrick did for a previous piece
and we didn't spend nearly as much time
on it as we did for the rest of these
assuming some B H boards can do 29 33
for the 10 400 marked D we've also
included that just to be safe and that's
at 247 FPS average with a tune there
under the 43 X ring of Mark II at 2666
CL 10 the 10 400 makes absolutely no
sense to buy if you're going to do all
of this work and all of this research if
you enjoy that stuff that's awesome but
please buy an unlocked part even from
AMD or Intel and if it's Intel by his
Easter he's bored with it because at
this point you're an OC enthusiast and
you should be proud of that and it's
really fun but getting into all this
stuff and then buying into a CPU that
only lets you change a quarter of the
things it just it's a waste of money if
you're that type of enthusiast GTA 5 is
next the original review results were
106 FPS average with 3200 CL 49z 490 and
97 FPS average for CL 15 20 66
representing it where we assume being a
boards will be stuck in this case the
performance gap was only 10% whereas
most other games showed a 14 percent
performance lead with better ramp
dropping to 2666 and cl 10 brought us to
107 FPS average so a jaunt of about 10
percent in exchange for all the work the
3300 X moves from 104 FPS average to 106
FPS average with some pretty basic
tuning putting it with an error of the a
listing CL 10 results of the $180 10 400
so once again the memory tune alone
isn't really enough maxing out with cash
ratio 243 the limit of the 10 400 at
least on the Z board we use the Maximus
extreme that helped us bring our average
up to 112 FPS but point 1 percent low is
sure that frame time consistency was bad
and that stability was suspect something
we'll look at more in a moment the 46
FPS average number it looks better than
reality for 0.1% and we'll show why in a
second this game seems more cash starved
than others as evidenced by the 10 600 K
stock 3200 CL 14 average of 114 jumping
to 128 from just adjusting the cash
ratio nothing else no memory tune no
overclock only cash ratio so that's a
12% jaunt for just that change and
that's the only thing we changed there
the memory was our standard review
memory for that one as we said in the
first piece it's an arms race so it
doesn't matter if you can overclock or
tune the 10 400 because you can also
overclock or tune the 10 600 K the 3300
X the 3600 and with a worse starting
position for the 10 400 and assumed
equal time invested in all parts because
realistically if you're saying you're
going to tune one of these then you'll
tune the other one the same amount you
still shouldn't buy the 10 400 maybe
developers could justify it for the IGP
but that's about it from our perspective
people who need an eye GP sure go for it
people who aren't overclocking and even
IGP go for it it's cheaper than the 10
600 K maybe you're not you don't care
about high FPS whatever otherwise AMD
and Intel have other offerings on either
side of it that make more sense now back
to the GTA 5 chart a more reasonable
tune would be mark F 11 13 13 28 which
we assume most people would be able to
deal with pretty minimal work but that
doesn't even reach parity with the 3200
CL 14 kit meanwhile investing equal
for it into tuning the 3600 as we did
the 10 400 on a simulated B or H board
got us to 116 FPS average right between
the 10 600 K results the 10 400 can't
keep up on its lower frequency period
for the core frequency that is this time
especially if you test properly and you
actually follow tau P l1 and PL to the
argument of just tuning the memory goes
both ways here and it's not fair to only
do it on one platform if that argument
is going to be made in favor of the
other platform you have to do it on both
as for the framerate issue here's a look
at that the frame time plots are the
closest representation of player
experience interval to interval with
lower being better more consistent is
best a frame time of about sixteen point
six six milliseconds would be 60fps but
frame rate is an abstraction from the
base metric of time so the frame time
plot better represents the stutters you
would encounter as seen here there are
several spikes up to 100 milliseconds
but it's actually way worse than that we
just zoomed this chart in for the first
run-through so that you could see the
beginning of the test here's the real
chart we have frame time spikes upwards
of nine hundred milliseconds which means
you'd be waiting almost an entire second
from one frame to the next
the 43 X cash ratio wasn't stable in
this test more voltage didn't help so we
would just have to lower it to 42 X or
lower in this instance but otherwise the
the reason the numbers came out the way
they did in the previous chart is
because you're averaging multiple runs
so thousands and thousands of cells of
data but only these couple of frames
popped up during all of that so even
with 0.1% lows which get us closer to
this we still aren't close enough to see
these values and that's why we need the
frame time chart shadow of the Tomb
Raider is next the review of ten four
hundred thirty two hundred number held
155 FPS average allowing to stock ten
six hundred K elite of 5.3% the 2666 CL
15 number had us at 135 FPS average
equal to the 3300 x stock the 3300 x
jumps to 141 FPS average with a lighter
tune working for a day on the tertiary
and secondary timings with 10 400 tune
we got up to 154 FPS average back to
3200 CL 14 primary levels the 10 6 RK
meanwhile demonstrates that it's
actually bouncing off of a GPU limit
with a simpler tune investing again
equal average into the 36
hundred tune we end up at 157 FPS
average allowing the stock 10600 k elite
of 3.7% or the max overclocked in
fairness 10600 k is 177 FPS average
elite of 13% the 10400 meanwhile ends up
below the 3600 entirely accepts for its
one instance of ridiculously good ram as
e 490 board and some tuning work we've
pretty much proven the point by now but
let's look at one last chart for total
wars campaign benchmark in this one the
original 10 400 results had it at 132
FPS average for 3200 seal 14c for 90
results or a chart bottom in 115 FPS
average with a 2666 CL 15 ramp tuning to
what we think is unachievable 1113 1328
got us to 125 FPS average a bump of 13%
over the 2666 CL 15 result that's cool
and it does aid the argument of the 10
400 but only if you ignore that you can
also overclock every other part of the
bench doing the same work for the 3600
gets it to 139 FPS average leading the
10600 case stock result by 1 FPS so
we're with an error and it also leads
the 4000 megahertz CL 1510 400 result by
3% which is not with an error the 10 600
k max OC still leads everyone by a lot
at 159 FPS average but the real point is
that the 10 400 can be out tuned by
every other part that's nearby and price
particularly the similarly priced 3600
the cheaper 3300 X lightweight tuned
even gets it close to the F result of
the 10 400 and the 10 600 K obviously
has plenty of room above it that's the
numbers then so to answer the question
of if you wanted true apples to apples
you did it the wrong way Steve knows he
should have dropped 30 200 220 666 and
so on I mean I knew the answer already
but we've invested three days improving
it so there you go there's the numbers
the 10 400 still loses surprise and the
3600 if you invest the equal time tuning
it is able to actually do better than we
even suspected previously so that was
good information to take away from this
couple of notes first of all please
don't harass other reviewers when we
post things that may disagree with their
opinions multiple people can have
multiple opinions it's fine it's not
cool to see our common sirs going and
harassing other reviewers for their work
because everyone puts a lot of work into
it and we may come up with different
numbers but there's different testing
there's different opinions and there's
different beliefs as to what's okay for
testing so don't harass people that's
that's number one I want to point that
out right now secondly to that one of
the big beliefs we have is that you
should test following Intel official
guidance which means not using the
motherboard default out of the box
untouched if that motherboard cheats if
it changes the settings if it changes
beat clock silently if it maxes out PL 1
PL 2 and tau if it disregards Intel
official guidance and makes the CPU
better than how it is marketed and
advertised
it's basically pre overclocking it and
once you're basically pre overclocking a
CPU you're in territory where now it's a
slippery slope of for whom do you apply
these changes do we also disable the
limits on AMD boards because just
because I am the enforces their limits
better it kind of makes it unfair if
Intel's motherboard partners are running
blasting PL on PL 2 and tau out of the
box which is way outside of the official
speck in the spreadsheets that Intel
sends out a lot of the time or
spreadsheets the spec tables that you
see online if you allow that then it's
just you gotta allow the other stuff to
you it make sense I look bad all sorts
of power consumption so they they win
and they lose just depends on what chart
you're looking at we've made that point
before though
but that's our believe and because of
that it means that our numbers will
always be conservatively low at least
for now based on the way the specs work
now and that's a good thing because if
you pre overclock it out of the box
there's a good chance you'll have
instability for some of the users and we
don't think that is a good user
experience and it's really best that
Andy and Intel both have a set of rules
that we enforce for both of them and so
that's where we draw the line it has to
follow the official power limits that
are recommended by the company that
makes the CPU the motherboard makers
don't have a say in it in our opinion
and our reviews because now you're not
testing the CPUs you're testing the
motherboards and that's different so
that may be a reason you see different
numbers sometimes but outside of that
obviously memory is a factor and we've
now accounted for that and the 10400 is
bad value and you shouldn't buy it now
it's not an objectively bad CPU in that
it performs reasonably it's not like
it's garbage here but it's not good
value so opinion remains the same at the
same price you should
a 3,600 or 3300 extra game and if you
want to save some money and put the rest
of that into a GPU which will often get
you more performance anyway or you can
go the opposite direction spend more
money you get a 10 600 K it's a
phenomenal CPU for the price point
Intel's done well to recover we really
enjoy it for overclock in one of the
best CPUs we've worked with recently for
an enthusiast so 10 600 K is what we'd
recommend if you can stretch the budget
or if you're buying z4 90 anyway the
33:36 or what we recommend below that
Intel absolutely has to unlock its B&H
boards to start competing better in
enthusiast and really we'd like to see
it move away from the non case keys as
well problem is Intel sells so many damn
CPUs to OEMs that we don't matter none
of us none of us in the enthusiast
audience matter to Intel I mean to an
extent we do but it's a subdivision of
Intel and ultimately the business units
that are handling Dell HP Lenovo selling
trays upon trays millions of CPUs
they're the ones who who make the
decisions that affect this and so it's
unlikely this will change but we do want
to see a change if possible I GP is a
justification with a 10400 that we
didn't point out in the first video that
was a good point that some of our
counters made one of our colleges said
to be a developer and said they could
use an AI GP and the cpu and get the
perform so that's a good justification
for it otherwise outside of sort of
mainstream desktop you use we don't
really like it
at least outside of a Z board and then
you should buy something else as for the
memory though it's not cheap to get the
performance we got in some of these
charts so keep that in mind - that's it
for this one thanks for watching to
support us directly go to store
documents nexus dotnet or patreon.com
slash gamers nexus and check back for
other videos subscribe for more we'll
see you all next time
[Music]